[Transcript missing]
We do certainly get
asked the question a lot,
what is Apple doing building servers?
And we absolutely passionately believe
that you can't deliver a great user
experience on the desktop if you don't
have a great server backing it up.
There are areas where Apple can
truly understand how to optimize
to meet the needs of Mac users in
areas where competitive servers will
just never have that same degree of
attention to detail or polish or focus.
And we really believe
the mission at Apple,
hopefully you've heard time
and time again this week,
is to build the best
possible personal computer.
And in the 21st century and
certainly in the Mac OS X era,
that requires having an
incredibly strong server platform.
So where are we going?
Well, Apple Share IP for many, many,
many years has been an
unbelievably great product for us.
It's been the number one server in the
education market pretty much forever.
It focuses on incredible ease of use with
great general purpose services from file,
print, web, mail services now with the
current Apple Share IP product.
With Mac OS X, we're going to have an
incredibly powerful platform.
As you saw, hopefully,
in the hardware keynote Tuesday morning,
Mac OS X,
from an infrastructure perspective,
is capable of some
incredibly great things.
We're going to have an
incredibly great file system,
very modern network environment,
and as was hinted in the keynote,
an enablement of
symmetric multiprocessing.
All of these capabilities,
when you add it to the wealth of
services that Apple Share provides,
leads us with an incredibly
strong platform that is powerful,
robust, scalable,
and is easy to administer and manage.
Also add on top of that the
innovative new capabilities
that Mac OS X server provides.
Netbooting,
the easiest way to get a network,
say a classroom in a lab,
set up with almost zero administration.
QuickTime streaming.
QuickTime is transforming how
people communicate over the web.
You need a powerful engine,
and we've delivered QuickTime streaming
with the Mac OS X server product.
And then you take all of that
with the context of open source.
The fact that the Darwin layer,
we ship the source code to the very
foundation of the operating system,
and it allows and enables certain
opportunities to enhance the system,
for you to take it in directions
that maybe we haven't had
the chance to prioritize.
And it makes for a much more open
and easy to work environment for
certainly the developer community.
You add all of that together,
and you have what we believe,
and we're very excited about it,
is just an incredible,
the best ever server that
Apple has ever produced.
So let me just spend a couple
minutes talking about some of the
history and some of the lineage
behind our current servers.
And I'll focus on maybe
just two key areas,
one in K12 and then one
very close to Apple.
When Mac OS X Server was
introduced last March,
there's a number of very
powerful capabilities,
but one that was incredibly exciting,
very bleeding edge in terms of
a new technology introduction,
was NetBoot.
And we consciously picked a number
of test sites that we would be able
to evaluate and test the technology.
One of those was a K12 school district,
Hacienda de la Puente.
And the benefits of being able to
take a server and configure it with a
version of the Mac OS operating system
that had the right set of extensions,
the right set of preferences,
the right applications,
and literally just walk in with an iMac,
connect up a network connection,
hold down the N key,
and that iMac would boot across
the network off of that server.
It's a very interesting technology.
and others have been involved in this.
Thank you.
I think it's important to note that
the average service time for a school
district is about two and a half days.
It really has transformed the way that
school district can deliver content.
Students are free to roam from
machine to machine to machine.
Their work environment is always there.
From an administration perspective,
they are able to keep their network
up-to-date with minimal investment.
It's been a highlight in terms of how
the future of technology can really
change the way that people teach
and learn using computers as a tool.
We've seen just incredible
interest around the world
in the NetBoot technology.
It's actually expanded well
beyond the K-12 market,
even though that was our
initial primary focus.
Another really amazing capability
with Mac OS X Server in terms of its
robustness and the WebObjects application
server solution for which there are 18
tracks here at the conference this week,
is just some of the incredible things you
can do in terms of delivering web-based
services in concert with all the other
technologies that the server provides.
A couple interesting little
anecdotes about the power of
Mac OS X Server in that environment.
The Apple Store is one of the
leading e-commerce sites in the web,
a pan market,
not just the computer technology market.
It is incredibly reliable.
We basically, on an annualized rate,
realize about a billion dollars worth of
revenue that is sold through that store,
and that is running
completely on Mac OS X Server.
It's an incredible service.
It's an amazing thing to put
the trust of that much revenue
in the hands of technology,
but we believe incredibly
strongly that you have to,
these words have been used before,
eat your own dog food.
We use Mac OS X Server for the store.
We use it to deploy a number
of the iTools solutions.
We're using it for internal networks.
And it's been an absolutely
amazing technology,
and we're investing very,
very heavily in it.
So let's walk through
the basic architecture.
Hopefully this is now in order.
This is an old, boring slide,
the definitive architecture
roadmap of Mac OS X.
Where we have the Darwin layer,
it's the operating system plumbing,
strong graphics architecture,
a variety of application
programming models,
and obviously the user interface.
Well, how does the server fit into this?
How do we map the key technologies
and the architectures and the layers
that a server platform would provide?
Well, take that whole Mac OS X picture
that you saw previously,
and that's the
Mac OS X layer at the bottom.
bottom of our server services roadmap.
The important message is that our
server offerings start with the
desktop product and then we add to it.
We have a number of services
that I'll talk to in a moment,
but there's two key bands below
and above our individual services,
and that's a common directory
architecture and a common
administration model.
From the services perspective,
File and Print remains the primary
services that a workgroup network
expects to be great and work well,
especially in a Mac-oriented environment.
A wealth and portfolio
of Internet services from
Web through Mail and others.
Comprehensive network services
and network solutions.
Desktop Management Services.
Desktop management allows a K-12
school administrator to create all of
the policies in order to effectively
run a lab of student-driven machines.
Are they allowed to access CD-ROMs?
What preferences should be
managed on their behalf?
Which preferences are they
allowed to manage themselves?
And as I mentioned,
a comprehensive administration
architecture so that we have the
ease of use and the simplicity
of managing a diverse system.
out of server services.
So that's a very high level
perspective on our approach,
our architecture.
I'd like to invite on stage Greg Burns.
He will talk about the server
solutions and the internet,
and it's all yours.
Thanks, Ken.
Hi.
I'm going to talk to you a bit about what
we're doing with additional services on
top of the Mac OS X operating system.
But before we get into that,
I want to say one more
thing about Mac OS X,
the operating system itself.
And you've all seen this diagram now,
I think, several times.
It has Darwin down at the bottom.
And hopefully many of you have heard
that Darwin is based in part on FreeBSD.
And FreeBSD is not a newcomer
to the operating system world,
and there's a lot of experience built
into FreeBSD running as a server.
Has anybody here ever heard of Yahoo?
Everybody?
You should all be raising your hands.
How about Hotmail?
Probably heard of that as well,
Microsoft's Hotmail.
Both of these are networks
that run on FreeBSD.
So FreeBSD has a good pedigree
as a server operating system,
and as part of the core of Mac OS X,
it provides a good foundation
for providing a server.
And as Ken said,
we're not a big iron company,
but for our customers,
there is a strong foundation
there for building services.
So in Mac OS X Server,
we are providing some
additional capabilities on top
of the core operating system.
The first one is the
Directory Services and the
Directory Architecture.
And the goal here is that we want to
have a common directory that underlies
all of the services and applications
using the network in Mac OS X.
And we do this in two parts:
through an API that any
application can use,
and this allows any service,
any application, whether it be on the
client or the server,
to access network resources.
And because we recognize,
even though we provide a
directory with Mac OS X,
we recognize there are other
directories in the world,
and perhaps you want to access NDS or
Kerberos or some other directory.
So this API provides for the
ability to access other directories.
And in addition to accessing
information in directories,
you also want to be able to figure
out whether or not somebody is
authorized to use resources.
John Smith may be in a directory,
but you also want to know if the
client is in fact John Smith and
give him authorization to
access certain resources.
So the directory APIs include
a central authentication
authority to provide for that.
And together with the network information
and the central authentication authority,
you can manage users
centrally in your network.
And so how does it fit together?
Well, the key piece here is that
green band in the middle,
the Directory Access API.
This exists both on the
Mac OS X desktop and on the server side.
And our software,
as well as your solutions,
can sit on top of this.
This is a public API.
We have extensive documentation for it.
And it's very easy to use,
very easy to get access to any
directory service through this.
And underneath there,
you'll see that there
are several plug-ins.
There's an open plug-in architecture.
And we use that ourselves.
This is key.
We use it ourselves
for accessing NetInfo.
So we're eating our own dog food here.
And all of the accesses to NetInfo,
our directory service,
are done through this
plug-in architecture.
We also provide LDAP, as well.
But in addition, if you have a directory,
you can plug in there, as well.
The API, as I said,
it exists on the desktop
as well as the server.
It's utilized by all of our services.
In our current Mac OS 9 product,
Apple Share IP,
we have Directory Services in there,
but they weren't universally
utilized by all of our services,
and that's something we
wanted to fix for Mac OS X.
So now in Mac OS X,
all of the services are integrated
with the core Directory architecture.
And as you saw, it is extensible.
It's a runtime plugin architecture,
so you can develop new directory plugins
that allow applications to access new
directories without having to touch the
code or recompile those applications.
And we ourselves will be delivering
NetInfo and LDAP support as part
of the core directory services
in the desktop and on the server.
On the server side,
in addition to the APIs for
accessing the directory,
we're also providing the NetInfo
Directory Service itself.
This is Apple's distributed
replicated directory service,
and this provides the ability to
manage users and resources on the
network for a Mac OS X Server.
We recognize, again,
that there will be clients
that don't use NetInfo that
want to access this directory,
and so we will be providing LDAP server
support as well to provide the same
data in response to LDAP queries.
In addition,
we know that if we're using an
external directory such as LDAP,
for instance,
if you want services in Mac OS X to
be able to take advantage of this,
we have a standard schema that you
can enter into the LDAP directory
to allow accounts in Mac OS X to
log in and to utilize services
through this LDAP directory.
And so that is all well
defined in the API.
So where's the opportunities
for you in all this?
Well, first and foremost,
if you have a directory,
if you're a systems developer,
or perhaps you're
working at a university,
you have a proprietary directory,
in particular to your site,
we want your directory
to work with Mac OS X.
So develop a plug-in for your directory.
And secondly,
if you're developing an application,
whether it be a productivity
application like email,
calendars, et cetera,
or a vertical application,
if you're doing directory access,
you'll want to use the Directory API.
And finally, of course,
managing directories
is a complex activity,
and so there is opportunity here
as well to provide management
utilities for directory services.
There is an additional session tomorrow
that you'll want to be aware of if you're
interested in learning more about the
Directory APIs and developing to them,
and that's going to be in this
room tomorrow at the same time.
And so if you're interested in this,
please come back tomorrow and hear
more about the Directory API and
how to develop plug-ins and how to
use the API for your applications.
Okay, so the directory, of course,
sits on both the client and the server.
Now we're going to talk specifically
about some stuff that is part of the
server and will be in the server version
of the Mac OS X operating system.
And I'll tell you a little
bit about where we're going
from a technology standpoint.
File Services, as Ken mentioned,
is a core staple of a server offering.
And so with File Services,
we want to provide basic,
high-performance,
reliable services for any client.
And in addition,
because Sherlock is a core
part of Apple's technology,
we want to make sure that the
indexing support for Sherlock is
built into the File Services as well.
So again, how does this fit together?
Well, if you look at this at the top,
you see a variety of file services that
we want to support in Mac OS X Server.
And the key here is that
these are all shared.
A key goal of Mac OS X Server is to
bring all these services together
and to make the configuration and
the privilege management integrated,
sitting on top of the Mac OS X operating
system and the Mac OS X file
system and file system privileges.
And of course,
all of these services use the
Directory Service for user
access and authentication.
So as far as the services themselves,
of course we have AFP.
And with AFP we've introduced
some changes to the protocol.
So we have a new version, 3.0,
that adds some more features
for support of Mac OS X,
the Mac OS X desktop.
In addition, we have SMB support.
That's something that is new to the
upcoming version of Mac OS X Server.
Our SMB support is based on Samba.
I'm sure a lot of you
are familiar with that.
It is the best third-party implementation
of Windows File Support around.
It's open source and
it's been well tested.
And so that's something that
we are going to be providing
in Mac OS X Server as well.
Mac OS X Server is UNIX,
so underneath the hood in Darwin,
there is UNIX down there,
and so there is NFS in there as well.
So that is additional service that
will be provided for UNIX clients.
And of course, FTP,
if you have web browsers you want
to download across the internet,
FTP of course needs to be there as well.
And one of the shortcomings of the
current version of Mac OS X Server that's
shipping today is that there are
some limitations in the servers on
what file systems you can export.
So we wanted to remove that.
So services like AFP and SMB in
the future will be able to work
with the various file services
that come inside of Mac OS X.
So whether it's HFS or UFS,
etc., you'll be able to manage
both of those and export both of
those through the various services.
And of course, as we saw in the picture,
all of it is unified.
A key part of our overall server offering
is to make it very simple to use and
unified in terms of the management.
The performance is something that
we've been working hard at to
make sure that it is very fast.
And you've probably seen
some of the demos around SMP,
and you know we are working hard
to make sure that in the future
when SMP is available that we'll
be able to take advantage of that.
And of course,
we leverage the reliability of
the Mac OS X kernel as well.
And in addition,
we've put some work into making
sure that there are watchdog
services and other capabilities
to keep the server up and running.
In terms of developer opportunities here,
the first thing you should be
aware of is that if you're an
AFP developer on any platform,
you should support AFP 3.0 to
provide full support for Mac OS X.
Secondly,
if you're doing a directory plugin
that requires more than just a username
and password for authentication,
then you'll want to know about
custom user access methods that
are part of the Apple Share client.
And this allows you to do
complex authentication dialogues.
Most cases you won't need this,
but if you're doing
something really fancy,
it's something you should be aware of.
And finally,
there are some extension APIs and
the capability to extend some
of these services that you
might be interested in as well.
Print services is the other
staple of a server offering.
And the key thing to be aware of
about printing on Mac OS X is that
there's a whole new print architecture.
And so if you're involved in any
way in printing or print services,
this is something that you're
going to want to learn a lot about.
And there's a couple sessions
about that coming up,
and I'll point you to those in a minute.
But another thing as far as
printing in Mac OS X Server is that
we've layered all of our services
on this print architecture.
So in the past, in Mac OS 9,
we had a completely
separate print service,
completely separate print
architecture that couldn't leverage
anything on the server side that
had been done on the client side.
And of course, that was a shortcoming,
and we fixed this.
So now as a developer,
if you have a driver for a
particular type of printer,
it will work on both the
server and the desktop.
So that's something that is good news,
and you should be aware of that.
In addition,
the printers that we support right now,
the printing protocols
support PostScript.
But if you want to do converters,
for instance,
that would take you to a raster printer
on the back end for the desktop.
That will also work on the server.
So printing.
So we support clients, both Macintosh,
Windows, and Unix.
Again,
the Windows support comes from Samba,
so we get very robust support there.
And the support for the queues,
of course, right now is any
Mac OS X PostScript printer.
But again, as a developer,
you have the opportunity to put in
PostScript to raster converters and
have those work on the server as well.
And of course, because it's a server,
you can manage the queues and manage
the print jobs over the network as part
of our integrated management utilities.
As far as print opportunities
for you as a developer,
first and foremost,
if you have a solution for
publishing that runs on Unix,
you should port it to Mac OS X.
So if you're doing print services,
publishing workflow, reps, what have you,
there is an opportunity here.
It's very easy to port
these services to X,
and you should get started.
And I know some people already
have products running here,
but if you don't,
it's time to get started.
And the other thing here,
which I mentioned,
is that drivers for the client
side will also work for the server.
So it makes it very easy to support
additional types of printers on the
server side as well as the desktop.
And of course,
there is also the opportunity to
add additional management tools
to our server products as well.
Okay, so that covers File and Print.
Now another key area of our service
offering is Internet Services.
And Internet Services, of course,
any core piece of any server
is web and email services.
But we also have two
technology areas that are very
important to us here at Apple,
and that's QuickTime and WebObjects.
And you've probably heard a lot about
those at the conference here so far.
On the web side,
of course we want to have a web
service that provides web site hosting,
whether it be very simple,
something you want to get
up and running in minutes,
to very sophisticated
sites with virtual hosts.
A service that has a full-featured
web server with high performance.
And of course we need it to be
integrated with our management solution,
and we need it to be able to support
application development services like
WebObjects or like server-side scripting.
And the way we do this, of course,
is with standard Apache.
Those of you who are familiar with
the current Mac OS X Server know
that it includes standard Apache.
It is the standard Apache module.
In fact,
if you took the open source Apache and
recompiled it and substituted it in,
it would work just fine.
So this is fully standard
Apache with the dynamic module API.
And to that,
we've added server-side scripting.
It's available through
standard Apache modules.
Apache is well used
throughout the internet.
There's almost 9 million
sites using Apache now.
It's about 60% of the internet.
But even though it's well used,
it's not the highest
performing server out there.
And so we've put a lot of work
into increasing the performance.
And so that's an area where we're
going to continue to work on to have
a really high performance product.
And in addition,
some additional things that are coming in
the product that we're looking into are,
of course, increasing the capabilities
as far as SSL and e-commerce,
and also Sherlock indexing for the sites.
As a developer, of course,
because it is standard Apache,
it's very easy for you to come
in and develop Apache modules
to enhance the server,
to add new capabilities,
or to bring modules onto
the Mac OS X platform.
And of course,
the opportunity for management
tools exists as well.
That's something that's very
important in website management.
The other area that we're looking
at as far as core web services,
obviously, is email services.
They're very widely
used and very important.
And of course, as part of Mac OS X,
it needs to include an integrated
and very easy to use email server.
And of course, it needs to scale as well
and be high performance.
And because we have a lot of customers
that run on sites that have intermittent
connections to the internet,
we need to be able to support
message delivery remotely as well
through intermittent connections.
And the way we do this, of course,
is that we will be providing an
integrated mail server that includes
SMTP for message delivery and routing,
as well as POP and IMAP mailbox services.
Now, this server will work completely
by itself independently,
but because there are a lot of
folks that want to do more advanced
scripting of mail delivery and routing,
we have the option to work
with SendMail for delivery.
Or for that matter,
any other mail delivery
agent can be configured to
do the mail routing as well.
And of course,
like any mail server these days,
it includes anti-spam and the
message delivery capabilities
that we talked about.
Another part of our mail server is that
it's integrated with the directory.
So whether you're using our own
directory or whether you're using LDAP,
you can code into the directory
where the user's mailbox is
located and what machine it's on.
And routing can be set up for complex
mail installations in that manner.
And finally,
we have something that exists today in
Apple Share IP which we'll carry forward,
and that's our IMAP administration port,
which for people wanting to do
additional management utilities
makes it very easy to go in
through IMAP with an administrator
account and have full access.
So the entire mail store,
all the accounts and all the messages for
management reporting and what have you.
So in terms of developer opportunities,
well, there's two sides here.
One is if you have an application,
for instance, a server-side application,
say web-based email as an example,
make sure it runs on 10.
The other is if you have
a client application,
make sure it runs well in markets
that are important to Mac customers.
A good example here is the K-12
market where the mail users don't
have ownership of a particular
machine and need to move from machine
to machine to access their mail.
On the management side, of course,
there are a variety of management
tools that can be built,
including account
management through IMAP,
management of routing through SendMail,
as well as log management
or mail tracking.
So let's move on to two of the services
that are core to us here at Apple.
First one is QuickTime and
QuickTime Streaming Server.
Now, QuickTime Streaming Server,
hopefully most of you have heard of this,
but in case you haven't,
it delivers live media or on-demand
media through QuickTime movies
across the internet to hundreds
or thousands of customers.
So you can take an application
that's broadcasting live media,
say a radio show or a video, live video,
and basically have the
QuickTime Streaming Server deliver
that to hundreds of customers,
thousands of customers.
Or you can take a QuickTime movie and
hint it and put it up on the server,
and that movie can be accessed
on-demand and streamed to customers.
It's completely standards-based.
It runs on the RTSP and
RTP IETF protocols,
so it is the only fully standards-based
streaming solution out there.
And in addition to being a server,
you can also relay other broadcasts.
So basically you can set up--
. a relay of a live broadcast,
or you can set up multiple relays to
scale up a very large configuration for
thousands and thousands of customers.
Each server itself is highly scalable,
so whether you want to support a 56k
modem or a 288 modem or go to broadband,
DSL, or cable, or even to Internet at
megabits per second,
the server is capable of handling that.
And at modem speeds it can
handle thousands of connections.
And the other thing it's capable
of doing that's important is
usually over the Internet most
connections are done unicast.
You take a connection from the server
and you send data to the client,
and that's a single connection,
a single pipe.
So if you have thousands of clients,
you have thousands of connections.
But the server itself is also
capable of handling multicast.
So if you're in an area of the
Internet that can handle multicast,
or if you're on an intranet
where it's configured,
you have the ability to reach a lot more
clients with less network bandwidth.
The server itself also
has web administration,
something that we've been working on.
And of course,
if you haven't heard of it,
hopefully you'll want to check it
out because it's fully open source.
Some of our competitors will charge
about $50,000 for a product like this,
but for us it's free.
And so you can go out and get the server,
you can get the source today,
check it out.
It runs on multiple platforms
in addition to Mac OS X Server.
And so this is what we think is the
most expandable streaming server around.
Not only is it open source,
you have full access to the
source to do whatever you want,
but it also has a module API,
similar to Apache.
So different developers can come
up and add new functions to the
server without having to learn
the whole source base or without
having to get in each other's way.
And this is important for you
as a developer as an opportunity
because it allows you to develop
new features to the server.
The streaming market
is expanding rapidly.
It's a very rapidly growing market.
And there's a real opportunity to
get in here and add new features.
But it allows you to add those new
features not only as open source,
but also as modules which can be
shipped independently of the server.
And you can sell those modules as
binaries and sell them for money.
So there's an opportunity to go
both ways here and certainly a
good developer opportunity in
building modules for the server.
And of course,
as with the rest of the service,
there's additional options
for management tools.
Certainly in the streaming area,
that's an area where a lot
of management is needed.
People want to know who's watched
what for how long and when.
So there's a lot of opportunity for
management tools there to help out
with QuickTime Streaming Server.
Our WebObjects services you may
have heard a lot about if you've
been going to some of the sessions,
so I'm not going to cover
too much here today.
But just so you know,
WebObjects is our application server
that provides database content for web
services at the back end of a web server.
It runs on a variety of platforms,
including NTE and Solaris,
as well as Mac OS X Server.
And in addition to providing
the application server itself,
there's a lot of tools that
allow you to develop the
services as well as manage them.
And there's also objects that are there
as well that have been pre-written
to help you get going quickly.
And, you know, here's a good picture that
shows you sort of an example
of how it all fits together.
If you look in the upper
right-hand corner there,
you'll see the web browser
basically going through the
web server into WebObjects,
which brokers access to data,
whether the data is in a
database or other data source.
Or you can use the Java clients
that Avi demoed on Monday to
go into WebObjects directly
to access the same data.
So, you know,
the point here is that there's
tremendous opportunity.
And WebObjects and pretty much
any web application you want
to build on the server side,
you can do it with WebObjects.
You know, there's 18 sessions going on.
We have one every time, every day.
So if you have heard about
WebObjects and you're interested,
hopefully you've been to
some of those sessions.
And if you haven't,
you should definitely check them
out between now and Friday because
there is a lot of opportunity
here for you as developers.
Lastly, I want to talk just briefly
about Network Services.
Network Services are another piece of the
offering that we have in Mac OS X Server,
and that includes some of the lower layer
networking capabilities that you use to
set up a network and servers themselves.
And these are things like DNS,
which are used for setting
up domain name servers,
and of course there, as this is Unix,
we're leveraging Bind.
And we also have DHCP for
address assignment,
as well as SLP,
which does dynamic name lookup.
It's very similar to
AppleTalk's dynamic name lookup,
but it's a protocol that was designed
specifically for TCP by a standards body.
And all of these are available,
or will be available,
through Mac OS X Server,
and of course we have them integrated
with the server offering themselves.
So that gives you kind of an overview
of where we're going with some of the
Internet and the file and print services.
And so now I want to bring up Bob Murphy.
He's going to talk a bit more about
our desktop management and the
capabilities and technology there.
Okay, thank you, Greg.
As you mentioned, my name is Bob Murphy.
I manage an engineering group here at
Apple that's responsible for Macintosh
Manager and Network Assistant,
two components of the server program,
as well as multiple users,
which is a component of Mac OS 9.
Today we won't be talking
about multiple users,
but instead focusing on those
pieces of the server product.
are in the right direction here.
As Greg mentioned, we'll talk about
Desktop Management Services today.
I'll also touch briefly on the
administration piece before turning
it back over to Ken for him to close.
So I'd like to thank you for this
opportunity to get a chance to
tell you about the things that
my team and I work on at Apple.
And these are some of the key
pieces that we're involved with:
Macintosh Manager, Network Assistant,
and NetBoot.
Just to kind of get an idea,
how many of you are familiar or
have worked with Macintosh Manager?
Can I see a show of hands?
So that makes me feel good.
How about Network Assistant?
Oh great,
so we've got a lot of experience.
And NetBoot, is anybody working with
a NetBoot installation?
Great.
I'm feeling really good about this.
Well, hopefully,
hopefully it's not all as bad as you,
you know, say it to be.
But...
For those of you who aren't
familiar with Macintosh Manager,
just a brief overview.
Macintosh Manager is a product
that has a server component
as well as a client component.
It really provides what we like to think
of as two key pieces of functionality.
We talk about the virtual desktop,
the ability to move
preferences and bookmarks.
Ken mentioned them some in the success
story where we have the ability to
move things around to take advantage
of people going to different machines.
It also provides a piece of
what we call resource policy,
which restricts access
to certain resources as
defined by the administrator.
For example, whether or not people
can go to the chooser,
what applications they can launch.
So basically,
kind of configure the experience that
the user has on their desktop machines.
Network Assistant does
not require a server,
but it is bundled as part of
the product because it is a
very useful administrative tool.
What Network Assistant does is
there's an administrative workstation
as well as a client component.
And again,
we can break Network Assistant down
into two key pieces.
One we like to think of as interaction.
It gives you the ability to
communicate with the user either
through text chatting or through
sharing screens or through controlling
screens to large numbers of users.
The second piece we like to
consider is an administrative
maintenance component of the product,
which allows the user to
configure workstations similar
to their own or to their own.
So, this is a very useful tool.
The third component, NetBoot,
is a tool to help make
administrators' life easier,
basically around the
management of the client OS.
What we do is we provide a
server-based OS image that
then remote clients can boot.
So we have administration and management
of the OS in one central location.
So, we have a server-based OS image
that then remote clients can boot.
So, we have administration and management
of the OS in one central location.
What I'd like to talk about are some
of the goals that we have for Macintosh
Manager in the future releases.
And I think primarily to our
efforts is simplification.
What we found is there's a great
increase in the number of desktop
machines without a corresponding
increase in administrators to
manage and take care of those.
So anything that we can do,
any work that we can do to simplify
that experience and make it easier
for administrators to work with,
we want to try to accomplish.
Macintosh Manager has been very closed.
We had our own proprietary database.
We didn't give access
to the login screen.
We need to work to make it more open
and more available for developers
to interact with the products.
We need to start moving
in that direction,
and that's a goal of ours.
Does that take care of all the hisses?
. Gosh, these are tough.
Simplify the user experience.
Just as for administrators we'd
want to try to simplify it,
we also need to simplify it
for the users because when
we simplify it for the users,
we win all around.
Prepare for Mac OS X.
Key initiative for all of us.
Our server components are Mac OS X.
They work on Mac OS X today.
What we need to do is start moving
our client components to Mac OS X.
So we have some ability
to provide Macintosh
Manager functionality there also.
Compatibility.
Compatibility is also a big issue for us.
We are very large in education.
Education keeps a large
amount of legacy hardware.
Therefore, we have to provide support
fairly far back in the client OS.
Greg talked about Directory Services.
Well,
we're going to take advantage of that.
In the past,
we had our own set of users and groups.
We had our own passwords.
All the administrators had to manage.
We're now going to take advantage
of Directory Services so
there's a single user,
user and group setting,
and password administrator
in one central location.
The other piece that we've been asked
for consistently is a way to plug into
our log-in screen and for authentication.
Very popular in that
arena has been Kerberos.
So by taking advantage of the directory,
we're going to be able to take
advantage of Kerberos plugins
as they're written to provide an
alternative method of authentication.
I think I've got more
claps than hisses now.
Okay.
Well, maybe not.
Mac OS X User Home Directory.
As I talked about preparing for Mac OS X,
one of the things that we want to do is
share the same storage space so that when
a user is working on their 8 or 9 machine
and they move to a Mac OS X machine,
they still have access to their files.
They're stored in the
same home directory,
which we see as part of moving
our transition to Mac OS X.
In addition,
we're also going to store application
preferences in that home directory.
So Carbon applications that are still
using the old preference management
methods of storing preferences in
the preferences folder will get their
preferences on Mac OS X machines.
So we're starting to move to
that direction in terms of the
virtual desktop experience.
The resource policy is
not happening right away.
As I mentioned earlier,
our server process is on Mac OS X.
We're now moving our admin
application to Carbon,
which will make it available on Mac OS X.
And the support will still continue
to support back to client 761.
Just a quick overview.
Basically,
you see in the center is the server.
The Directory Services are below us.
Mac Manager will still
have a server process,
as well as we'll work with
the AFP server process.
The Directory Database, Users and Groups,
that'll be stored in
one central location.
We will still plan on storing
some information in our databases.
We weren't able to do a full
transition over in the near term.
We do want to work on that longer term,
so we no longer have this proprietary
set of information to Mac Manager.
So we'll be moving in that direction.
So let's get off Mac Manager for a while.
Hopefully Network Assistant isn't
as controversial.
Just a few key things
about Network Assistant.
I think it could really
all be summed up as,
in the first point,
is support for the future,
and that means moving to Mac OS X.
Again, the simplicity,
make it easy to use as it is today,
and continue to advance on
that to make it easy to use,
and again, support compatibility.
The key detail,
or the key thing that we're
working on for the next release
is to provide a full featured
client for our Mac OS X machines.
So that's really the gist of what
we're working on at this point.
We will have a
Mac OS X admin application,
but we're also gonna,
even as we move to X,
we understand there's still lots
of 8 and 9 machines out there,
so we want to provide the administrator
the ability to manage the machines,
no matter whether they're 8, 9,
or 10 machines.
So that's kind of where
we're headed there.
We don't support 761 right now.
Yeah, it would.
It's hard though.
It's really hard for that piece.
So that kind of covers
those three components,
or those two components.
Now let's move on to NetBoot.
I think NetBoot is really exciting.
It's a really cool technology.
I'm really excited about what's
going to happen going forward.
But basically what it does,
it kind of ties to that theme
that I think that Ken mentioned,
and Greg also, is to simplify.
Is to make it easier for
administrators to take care of things,
because you've got all
these client machines,
and you're not getting any more
administrators to take care of them.
So what we do is we provide a single
location on a server to manage the OS.
This makes it protected
from user modification.
They may be able to modify it during
the course of their operations,
but with a simple reboot,
they're back to where they started.
So you have a protected OS.
Desktop OS has become trivial.
And actually, in addition to that,
some installation of
software becomes trivial.
You install it in one place,
you restart your clients,
you're installed.
So I think this is a real
big win for administrators.
It is our goal to work with standard,
unmodified Mac OSs.
Any Mac OS that is released should
automatically support netbooting and be
installable and usable in your network.
And we understand that
performance is important also,
that it must be comparable to local disk.
So the users don't know that
they're working on a netboot
machine versus a local boot machine.
Some of the details,
some of the details that the
NetBoot team is working on,
they want to make it work
in more robust networks.
It's going to interact
with standard DHCP servers.
[Transcript missing]
This is exciting,
especially in the situations where
you have different languages.
A machine may be used in
a multilingual setting.
You want to provide the ability
to boot in French or German or
Spanish or Japanese or any
language that you would like.
In addition,
you could provide a modified OS.
It doesn't need to be
language difference.
It could be other things installed that
you want to make available to the user.
Okay,
and it's going to be highly scalable.
We're moving to make it more scalable.
The clients will auto sense which
server has the least activity and then
it will go NetBoot from that machine.
I guess the key implication we can
think of for developers around Netboot
is you don't have a persistent OS.
As soon as it's rebooted, it's gone.
If Mac Manager is involved,
you can still manage preferences
and some of the system settings,
but you have to assume that
there is a non-persistent Mac OS.
Simple diagram.
Again, you see now with the
addition of multiple servers,
multiple Netboot servers,
you can see in the bottom
you have different subnets,
Net1, Net2.
The clients will interact and go
ahead and just boot right off whatever
server has the most availability.
So we think that that's a real win.
We think that's a real opportunity.
So I just wanna touch
briefly on administration,
the final block in our diagram
before I turn it over to Ken.
From an administration perspective, oops.
The goals,
I think the goals here again are similar.
It's simplicity, to make it easy to use,
to make it easy for the administrator
to get in and do the work that
they need to do and get out.
So simplicity.
One of the goals for that is
to move to one application,
to not have to go look around for
a whole bunch of applications.
We want to try to move
that to one central place.
Remote or local.
We understand that everybody's mobile,
right?
So we need to be able to provide
administration anywhere on the internet.
That's critical also.
And then the final point,
very easy to use,
just echoes that theme once again.
Some of the details:
it will be a client server architecture,
the administrative application,
and what this provides is
the second bullet there,
the admin server will update
the clients as needed.
For example,
if the server that you're trying to
maintain has a component that you don't
have the administrative piece for,
it'll automatically provide that for
you so you can go maintain that feature.
First bullet: it'll be Carbon also,
so Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X as well as Aqua.
It'll be Aqua interfaced.
We'll support SL and SLP for
locating servers as well as being
able to administer multiple servers.
And then the final piece,
what we're trying to focus on
is being able to do some limited
set of web administration.
So with that,
I think I've completed the section,
and I'd like to turn it
back over to Ken to close.
Thank you.
So to amplify a couple of points
that Bob made in particular,
how many people in the audience
produce client-side applications
that fit into the server environment?
[Transcript missing]
You've heard that there's a variety
of opportunities for developers
in this server environment with
the Mac OS X Server product.
Certainly there's a wealth of plug-ins.
Directory Service is central.
It's essential to the integration,
the interoperability of this technology.
And we're going to focus on a small set.
There's ample opportunity for a variety.
A couple are mentioned here.
The whole notion of management and
control of the server environment.
People need to be able to understand
how the technology is being used.
From a scalability perspective,
maybe you start with a
small number of servers.
Are you able to actually analyze
how the technology is being used
so you can most efficiently plan
your next year investments in,
do you focus on more bandwidth?
Or do you need more scalability?
There's a lot of scalability
for the file server.
So there's huge opportunities
for producing administration,
console utilities, log analysis,
how the server has been used
from a historical perspective.
A variety of services for guaranteeing
always-on availability of the
server from an auto-restart and
remote management perspective.
Backup and restore is always an
interesting and important opportunity.
The needs of backup scale from very,
very large to very small.
So there's a lot of scalability
for the file server.
So there's huge opportunities
for producing administration,
console utilities, log analysis,
how the server has been used
from a historical perspective.
A variety of services for guaranteeing
always-on availability of the
server from an auto-restart and
remote management perspective.
Backup and restore is always an
interesting and important opportunity.
The needs of backup scale from very,
very large to very small.
There's a lot of scalability
for the file server.
you know, very,
very large enterprise grade
environments where large customers have
investments in a backup technology,
all the way down to a much smaller,
you know, single user,
single administrator, you know,
tape driver, peripheral model.
So there's a wealth of
opportunities in there as well.
On the web and application space,
certainly Apache is just an
incredible web server technology.
The number of plug-ins that
turn Apache into an unbelievably
powerful platform is open for
anybody to entertain and exercise
with the Mac OS X server product.
And we can't say WebObjects
loudly enough more often.
This is some of the greatest
application server technology
that the world has ever seen,
and it creates some incredible
opportunities for adding value-add
application services on top of
this very powerful platform.
In terms of additions and
add-ons to the server,
from a hardware perspective,
obviously RAID solutions enables a
greater degree of scalability and
performance for the disk subsystem.
Large storage arrays, et cetera,
power management are all examples
of how the server product can
be enhanced beyond the confines
of our desktop hardware design.
And in the creative professional markets,
certainly there's incredible
opportunities for very sophisticated,
higher-end print management
and workflow solutions.
The print industry is obviously
being transformed by the greater
flexibilities and efficiencies
that the Internet has enabled,
and the publishing workflow is one that
is ripe for incredible opportunities
for adding value to the server product.